# CS301 ITSA Notes

## 01 Architectural Thinking I
### Trivia
- IEEE 1471: a representation of a whole system from the perspective of a related set of concerns.
- ISO 25010: defines the eight quality characteristics that are cornerstones of a product quality evaluation system. They are functional suitability, maintainability, performance, usability, compatibility, performance efficiency, reliability, portability and security.
- Architectural Significant Requirement (ASR): Any requirement that strongly influences our choice of structures for the architecture.

### Three main types of diagrams
1. Sequence diagram: for data or control flow
2. Network diagram: for network structure
3. Deployment diagram: for system structure

## 02 Architectual Thinking II
### Trivia
- Unikernels: specialized, single-address-space machine images constructed by using library OSes. 
  - They shrink the attack surface and resource footprint of cloud services.
  - They are built by compiling high-level languages directly into specialized machine images that run directly on a hypervisor, or even on bare metal (i.e. no base OS).
  - Since hypervisors power most public cloud computing infrastructure such as Amazon EC2, this lets your services run more cheaply, more securely and with finer control than with a full software stack.
  - Unikernels provide many benefits compared to a traditional OS, including improved security, smaller footprints, more optimization and faster boot times.
- Multitenancy: Unikernels provide many benefits compared to a traditional OS, including improved security, smaller footprints, more optimisation and faster boot times.
- Socket: an endpoint for communication, defined as "IP Address + port number"
  - For two-way communication running on the network.
  - The client always pings the server first to establish a connection.
- Tiered Architecture Style: each tier comprises of a set of components that are physical separated from other software components in other tiers. E.g.
  - LAN < OS < Browser
  - LAN < OS < Reverse proxy server
  - LAN < OS < Web App
  - LAN < OS < Database

### Difference between VMs, Containers and Unikernels
- VMs and Unikernels are similar in the sense that each OS running on the base layer (i.e. the hypervisor) only has 1 app.
  - While a Container can have multiple apps running on the OS.
  - OS is the layer on top of the hypervisor.
- However, VMs' OS images are larger - and therefore less lightweight compared to Unikernels.

### Network Zones and Proxy
- Demilitarized Zone (DMZ): the portion of a network that separates a purely internal network from an external network.
- Reverse proxy: an intermediate server that sits between the internal users and the internet server typically used to provide Internet users access to a internal server that is behind a firewall. Hides identity of the servers.
  - Outside-in
- Forward proxy: an intermediate server used to provide internet access to internal clients that are otherwise restricted by a firewall. Hides identity of the clients. 
  - Inside-out
- Air gap: a network security measure employed on one or more computers to ensure that a secure computer network is physically isolated (wired or wireless) from unsecured networks, such as the public internet or an unsecured local area network

### Classful Network
#### Class A
- E.g. 16.1.1.1, netmask 255.0.0.0
- Host has 24 bits

| Network | Host | Host | Host |
| ------- | ---- | ---- | ---- |

#### Class B
- E.g. 172.16.1.1, netmask 255.255.0.0
- Host has 16 bits

| Network | Network | Host | Host |
| ------- | ------- | ---- | ---- |

#### Class C
- E.g. 221.138.62.1, netmask 255.255.255.0
- Host has 8 bits

| Network | Network | Network | Host |
| ------- | ------- | ------- | ---- |

### CIDR Notation
Classless Inter-Domain Routing

Developed as an alternative to Classful Network. It helps to divide IPv4 addresses into more fine-grained divisions, such as 172.31.0.0/16, which means that the first 16 bits of the IP address (i.e. 172.31) are reserved for the network address, while the remaining 16 bits are reserved for the host.

This indicates that there is a size /16 default subnet (can be public or private).

### AWS VPCs and Subnets
#### VPC
- Virtual network dedicated to your AWS account.
- Logically isolated from other virtual networks in the AWS Cloud.
- Spans all of the Availability Zones in the Region.
- Must specify a range of IPv4 addresses for the VPC in the form of a CIDR block; for example, 10.0.0.0/16.
- Default VPCs includes a default subnet, an internet gateway, a main route table that connects the default subnet to the internet gateway, a default security group, and a default network ACL.

#### Subnet
- Each subnet must reside entirely within one Availability Zone and cannot span zones.
- If a subnet’s traffic is routed to an internet gateway, the subnet is a public subnet. 
- If a subnet’s traffic does not have a route to an internet gateway, the subnet is a private subnet.

**When do you use a private or public subnet?**
E.g. for these resources:
- Data Store instances
- Batch processing instances
- Backend instances
- Web application instances
- Web proxy server

By default: everything in private subnet but web proxy server (that can also server as a load balancer) in public.

## 03 Security Design
### Trivia
- Sniffing: a process of monitoring and capturing all data packets passing through given network.

## 04 Maintainability Design I
### Messaging
- Durable vs Non-Durable (does the subscriber needs all messages?)
- Persistent vs Non-Persistent (does the consumer needs guaranteed delivery?)

#### Durability vs Persistency
First of all: Queues can be durable and messages can be persistent.

A persistent message is a message that has been written to the disk. It is the publisher which makes the decision to make a message persistent. So when the publisher gets an acknowledgement back (Publish Confirm), the message is saved on the disk. If it is not durable the message resides in memory (unless Rabbit runs out of memory). If RabbitMQ is restarted all non-persistent messages will be lost.

Durable queues are queues that can survive a restart of RabbitMQ. If a queue is not durable it will be gone if RabbitMQ shuts down for any reason - along with all the messages.

So both of these configurations will have to be true for messages to survive restarts. Your messages will have to be persistent and your queues durable.

## 05 Availability Design I
Ping: passive -> active

- A machine with a running database that is receiving replication updates from another database but *not participating in the computational workload* is considered a passive node.

## 06 Availability Design II + Performance Design

### Brewer's CAP theorem
You can have at most two of these properties for any shared data system:

1. Consistency
2. Availability
3. Partition tolerance

AP: Dynamo
CP: Mongo with replica sets
AC: RDS MySQL

### ACID Consistency Model
Most developers are familiar with ACID transactions from working with relational databases:

1. Atomic
2. Consistent
3. Isolated
4. Durable